Gradle Example
==============

This is a simple Gradle project demonstrating local and remote dependency resolution and building an executable jar.

Running the example
-------------------

This project uses the `Gradle Wrapper`_ to automatically bootstrap the build chain.  The only requirement for running
this example is to have a JDK installed and on the path.  Check out `SDKMAN!`_ for easy Java version management.

In the root of this project, run::

    ./gradlew shadowJar
    java -jar build/libs/gradle-example-all.jar

The first command compiles the project and packages it into a fat jar.  The second runs that jar and prints out the
greetings.

About the example
-----------------

The ``build.gradle`` in this project demonstrates two main features, dependency management and using the `Shadow Jar`_
plugin to create an executable jar.

Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This project demonstrates loading dependencies from a Maven repository and from libraries included in the project.  The
repositories are declared in the ``repositories`` block::

    repositories {
        mavenCentral()
        flatDir {
            dirs 'lib'
        }
    }

The ``mavenCentral()`` declaration enables fetching dependencies from the standard Maven Central repository.

The ``flatDir`` declaration configures the ``lib/`` directory as a repository.  Gradle will make any jars it finds in
that directory available as project dependencies.  This is useful for libraries that are not published in a
repository but should be only be used as a last resort.

The ``dependencies`` block is where the project dependencies are specified::

    dependencies {
        implementation 'org.codehaus.groovy:groovy:3.+'

        // Groovy module dependency
        implementation 'org.codehaus.groovy:groovy-json:3.+'

        // Strictly exact version of Maven dependency
        implementation 'com.codevineyard:hello-world:1.0.1!!'

        // Dependency from local jar
        implementation ':simple-jar'
    }

This project is implemented in Groovy, and uses the Groovy Json module.  These are declared in the first two
dependencies.  The version of ``3.+`` means Gradle will use any Groovy version starting with a 3.

The next dependency has a strict version requirement: ``1.0.1!!``.  This means that Gradle will only consider exactly
version ``1.0.1`` as valid for this project.  If that version cannot be found in a repository, the build will fail.

Finally, the project uses a class in the ``simple-jar.jar`` file in the ``lib/`` directory.  Since this library isn't
hosted in any repository, the dependency uses a name automatically generated by Gradle.

There are more `version rules`_ available, but 99 times out of 100 a simple version number is all that is required.  You
can check which versions Gradle is using by running ``./gradlew dependencies``.

Shadow Jar
~~~~~~~~~~

The `Shadow Jar`_ plugin is designed to create a single jar file including all of a project's dependencies.  This means
an application can be packaged into a single file, with no classpath management needed.

Creating the fat jar is done using the ``shadowJar`` task::

    ./gradlew shadowJar

All of the project's runtime dependencies are packaged into a single jar file.  You can check the contents of the jar
from the command line::

    unzip -l build/libs/gradle-example-all.jar

Since this is a Groovy project, there are a lot of classes related to Groovy's dynamic enhancement of the JDK included
as well.

Using just the Shadow Jar plugin is sufficient to create a bundled jar with all dependencies.  We can make it more
useful, however, with the ``application`` plugin.  This is used to specify the main class::

    application {
        mainClassName = 'com.adjectivecolournoun.gradle.Greetz'
    }

Now the jar manifest has a ``Main-Class`` entry added to it allowing it to be run directly::

    java -jar build/libs/gradle-example-all.jar

The only requirement is a Java runtime environment.  Everything else needed is bundled into the jar file.

.. _Gradle Wrapper: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/gradle_wrapper.html

.. _SDKMAN!: https://sdkman.io/

.. _Shadow Jar: https://imperceptiblethoughts.com/shadow/

.. _version rules: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/single_versions.html